---
title: "Get More out of Distributed Meetings"
author: "Logan H Koch"
date: 2020-04-22
draft: true
---
Even in the best circumstances, effective distributed meetings can be difficult. They are especially hard for me because I have a dysfunction in my central auditory nervous system called Auditory Processing Disorder (APD)-think dyslexia of the ears. I also have Asperger syndrome, a difficulty with social interactions. Imagine going to a meeting where everyone is speaking a language you’ve just started learning-you can understand about 50% of what’s being said immediately and have to fill in the rest from context. That’s life for me every day: In a room filled with 20 people, my brain only hears about half of what’s said correctly, even when only one person is talking. My attention is focused so heavily on processing the conversation and reading social cues that I struggle to remember the details of a meeting. Given these challenges, I've had to put forth a lot of effort to get the most out of meetings I attend, and I thought I’d share a thing or two about what I’ve learned. Hopefully some of these will resonate with you.

## Before the Meeting
Having a clear understanding of the topic of discussion enables me to prepare before going into the meeting, which gives me more confidence. There have been times when I’ve shown up to meetings and misunderstood the scope; this happens most often when the team is trying to solve a problem and there are several issues that need to be addressed-it’s easy to try to  tackle everything at once! Asking for a clear agenda helps me reduce stress going into the meeting. Worst of all are meeting invites with no context; I get that sinking feeling in the pit of my stomach similar to being called to the principal's office. I once spent two days panicking about a Teams message I got that said “Let’s chat when you have a minute” because we couldn’t find “a minute” that overlapped. He ended up just wanting to touch base and say thanks for all the hard work that was happening! 

When possible, I like to have reference materials (e.g., handouts or a slide deck) ahead of time, and I will often ask the organizer for a copy in advance. Directly before the meeting, I take a few minutes to review the content that’s going to be presented; reading the material ahead of time means I’ll have more cognitive power to devote toward listening. I take note of potential areas of conflict and highlight any questions or areas of known confusion. All of these things prevent me from having to multitask during the meeting, allowing me to focus on the topic at hand and participate in the conversion more effectively. Depending on the day and the meeting I’ll give myself anywhere from 5–15 minutes to shift my attention away from my day-to-day work. 

## During the Meeting
**Note Taking.** I have a hard time taking detailed notes while someone is talking; my APD makes it difficult to split my attention between hearing and writing. I’ve found it helpful to write down a one- or two-word summary of each topic covered and the people who discussed it, and use arrows and other symbols to keep track of how ideas align or diverge and my conclusions from them. If someone said something I want to be able to recall verbatim, I’ll ask for a few seconds to write down what was said and repeat it back to them to make sure I captured them correctly. I also like to keep track of action items and make sure they get repeated at the end of the meeting-it’s a good way to summarize the meeting and helps me recognize when I’ve missed something important.

If it’s likely to be a particularly important or tense meeting, I will usually ask for someone to take notes, or if the meeting can be recorded for review afterwards. Another technique that’s been successful for me is creating a shared document that all participants can edit. I’ve only done this with small groups, but it was great to see what other people felt was important, and the process helped keep us all on track and engaged.

**Noise.** One struggle on any group call is the amount of background noise. Even white noise drastically reduces my ability to understand what’s being said. In a recent gathering where participants had a lot of background noise and talked over one another, I felt completely in the dark, unable to follow most of the conversation. I try to nudge people towards more helpful behaviors when it gets bad, but if it keeps happening, sometimes it’s better to wait until after the meeting ends to explain why what I’m asking matters to me. I’ve learned that people are a lot more receptive to making changes when they understand the why.

**Presence.** When I’m in a meeting, I have to put effort into being completely present. It’s easy to slip into a habit of half-listening, or be in a state of [continuous partial attention](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuous_partial_attention). If this keeps happening, I’ll ask if it is actually necessary for me to attend. A culture of ["voting with your feet"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foot_voting) has, in my experience, led to more productive meetings. How I address this is highly dependent on who has scheduled the meeting. It might be acceptable to just put a message in the meeting chat and drop off the call. Other times I’ll ask permission after the meeting not to attend the next one. If people are only half present, questions, answers, and general content have to be repeated and context gets lost. One meeting in particular comes to mind. The decision-maker kept asking people to repeat their questions because they were multitasking-all because the majority of the meeting wasn’t relevant to them. We eventually split the meeting up so that all the questions for the decision-maker could be addressed at the start and then they could drop off. This led the overall meeting to take less time and garner less frustration. My team has worked to make it a team norm to leave our video on, our chat windows closed, and our phones out of reach to encourage keeping our full attention focused on the meeting.

**Active listening.** I’ve also had to learn how to listen to understand, not to make a comment. I don’t have to be the first to speak in order to be heard, and it doesn’t matter if someone else says what I was thinking before I do. Not to mention, not every question has to be answered in the meeting. If I have a question that’s preventing me from understanding, I’ll ask away; if it’s tangential, I write it down and ask after the meeting or during the “Does anyone have any questions?” phase. Don’t be shy about important questions, though! I’ve discovered that I’m almost never the only one wondering about something. By asking, I’ve probably helped at least one other person grasp the discussion better.

Sometimes, questions are how we find out people are starting with different assumptions. For example, if I’m unsure, sometimes I’ll say “What I hear you saying is…” or ask “Is my understanding that… correct?” I’ve also had to make sure not to overcorrect to the point where I’m not speaking up at all. I’ve struggled to find a balance, and it’s harder in faster-paced conversations. Recently I’ve been working on asking people to back up or slow down.

## After the Meeting
A decrease in working memory [due to my APD](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4764960/) makes it harder to retain information. After noticing coworkers say things like “We just talked about this last week...”-or worse, “Weren’t you paying attention in those other meetings we’ve had?” I knew I had to make changes to improve retention. Shortly after a meeting now, I’ll look over the minutes and compare them to my own notes. I take my handwritten notes and type them up, adding details about each topic and paying special attention to areas of disagreement and why a specific solution was chosen. Since I have the names of each person who discussed each topic I can reach out to get clarification or fill in gaps. Color coding to represent urgency or importance helps make the notes easy to parse later on, and that’s vital since the biggest improvement to my retention came from reviewing the previous day’s meeting notes the next day and then again after a few more days to help them stick in my long-term memory.

I like to spend a few minutes reflecting on the social interactions as well. Did anything surprise me? If so, it’s a good indication I might have missed a social cue or done something abnormal. Sometimes it’s helpful to reach out to a peer and ask for clarity; it helps to have someone who is comfortable being blunt provide feedback. Something I still struggle with is making sure my comments are on point and not off in left field; I’ve learned that what seems relevant to me can seem completely unrelated to others, and sometimes derail the conversation. By communicating that I’m aware of this weakness to a few people and asking them to look out for when I do it, I’ve given them permission to have what might previously have been a difficult conversation, especially if they struggle with confrontation.

## Your Mileage May Vary
I started intentionally improving how I attended meetings about three years ago. I initially focused on what other people could do to accommodate me, but at some point I took ownership of my own behavior. While it’s important to provide reasonable accommodations, I’ve found that these techniques reduce my dependence on the behavior of others. I’m now better able to handle meetings that take place in less than ideal circumstances such as remote meetings with conference rooms, poor equipment, or even my neighbor mowing his lawn.