---
title: "Lowering Onboarding Barriers For New Hires"
author: "Kourtney Reynolds"
date: 2020-03-27
---

on·b`oard·ing

/ˈänˌbôrdiNG,ˌänˈbôrdiNG/

noun

1.  the action or process of integrating a new employee into an
    organization\...

Going through new hire orientation ranks somewhere between the yearly
trip to the dentist and getting an oil change. There is nothing
particularly exciting about it but when it's complete, the nagging
feeling that something is amiss fades quickly. We can probably all agree
that no matter how great a fit or how high our level of enthusiasm,
getting started in a new role is a new challenge. As an individual that
is early in her career as a software engineer and new to working in a
distributed workforce, I want to highlight the importance of lowering
barriers to onboarding new hires into an organization.

Paperwork is the Pits
---------------------

The best "welcome" from HI Digital Solutions (DS) was when I got an
email a week ahead of my start date with my new hire paperwork. Although
there was no rush to fill out the ten or so pages of documents before
day one, this made for a relaxing first day by reducing the cognitive
load of looking at new hire forms. This easy gesture gave enough time to
drum up any questions I may have had to bring to the benefits meeting.
It showed me that as much as I was excited to join DS, they were equally
ready to have me onboard. I could not have asked for a better first
impression.

Introductions
-------------

When my first day started with HI Digital Solutions (DS), I wasn't
surprised at how many times I got introduced in meetings with various
individuals across the business. However, I caught myself thinking, "who
are these people and why am I being introduced to them?". While I was
happy to meet folks, learning people's names without really having a
grid for what their niche was made it difficult to figure out what my
expected daily interaction with some of them might be. Sure, I got names
and sometimes titles, but it was hard to put the pieces together for who
the people were and why they were on the call. A helpful exercise might
have been to see an organization chart ahead of time and get some job
descriptions and some context around the people I would be meeting.
While it was certainly helpful to have an calendar invite with a
description reading "ABC" team to talk about "XYZ", a little more
background detail about the people I was meeting on the call,
beforehand, would have been helpful for understanding my interaction
with them in the day to day.

Expectations, Calendars and Administrivia, Oh My!
-------------------------------------------------

Knowing the relationship between time and tasks, and how they are
tracked, is pretty important for any organization. During the first week
in my new role, I was not aware that a timesheet existed. It had not
occurred to me to ask how the billing system worked and where I needed
to log my time. My previous employer had my colleagues and me break out
time down to the half hour and with many project codes and sub tasks.
Not having it mentioned for two or three days after I started, naively,
I assumed we were not tracking time in the manner I had experienced in
my previous position. My superior recognized his oversight and showed me
the ropes with no problem in fifteen minutes or less. He also showed me
a document that I could refer to should I have any questions afterwards.
This oversight would easily have been solved within a structured new
hire orientation session about task tracking.

Towards the end of my first month with DS, some logistical timezone
issues were pointed out to me. The issue was that from looking at my
calendar my colleague could not discern my daily availability. Within
our organization it is not uncommon to juggle pair programming schedules
within a team distributed across three time-zones. However, we also have
an unwritten rule of keeping our calendars open so that we are available
to work cross-organizationally when needed. Not having a clear
understanding of how our organization used calendars did create a small
hurdle. It would be very helpful to have this information disseminated
during new hire orientation as well.

An unexpected challenge that also bubbled up during my first month was
the extent of each team member\'s individual involvement at the
organizational level. Digital Solutions uses a mob-pairing approach to
strategic planning. Monthly, we brainstorm and discuss budgets, targets,
and the direction of our organization. The whole DS organization has the
privilege of raising up ideas and concerns for what our strategic plan
should include, which is a serious responsibility. Don't get me wrong,
getting to help build an organization has been an all around positive
experience. Although it has been reiterated that we are not obligated to
participate in planning, the opportunity is difficult to pass up. I was
a bit slow to engage because I was simply trying to wrap my arms around
being included in something so important to the organization. One
potential solution for lowering the barrier to engagement could have
been creating discussion centered on a review of the previous year's
strategic plan. Most importantly to me, would be hearing how the team
came to certain decisions as it would have been useful in figuring out
how I might add to the conversation. After a few meetings, one of the
team members offered an example of how one of the goals in the plan had
been met. Tying "success stories" of how we are meeting goals provided
great insight into how I might frame my thinking. For me, as a new hire
I want to be aligned to organizational goals. A new hire orientation
could be an excellent time to get stated goals the attention they
rightfully deserve.

Unexplained Acronyms
--------------------

During the first month at DS, I had trouble following conversation arcs
during meetings because of organizational acronyms. It is very easy to
take for granted acronyms that are used on a daily basis\--without
realizing that new hires may be completely in the dark about the
meanings. Coincidentally, a large part of the confusion was around a
project planning tool called the Business Agility Framework (BAF). After
being led through the diagram during a team learning session a few
months later, the context for the organizational acronyms became
abundantly clear. Furthermore, digging into the what, why, and how of
each acronym's meaning helped tremendously. This higher level business
framework had context that informed my understanding of how project work
was handled. I would have liked to have been introduced to it during a
new hire orientation.

User Profile Merry-go-Round
---------------------------

Between six to eight weeks had passed in my new role with DS, when I and
a colleague discovered that we were accessing one system with the wrong
user profile. As it turned out, it wasn't just me. There was not
complete clarity for others at DS about which profiles were to be used
and when. Making matters worse, we created confusion for the technical
support folks who were in charge of managing our permissions because
they also did not have clear user profile management guidelines. It was
easy enough to ask and get an answer from the team, but I argue that
having a matrix, FAQ or something might have made things less confusing.
Taking a new hire through that matrix early on would bring clarity and
help ensure problems don't wait six to eight weeks to be discovered.

Who Do I Ask Again?
-------------------

Towards the end of my "orientation" window, as I was becoming more
integrated, I finally had enough context to start asking more in-depth
questions. The issue of knowing who to ask for information, when I did
not know, became a non-issue. As an organization that relies heavily on
crowdsourcing new hire orientation, DS handles this challenge
brilliantly. The solution rests inherently in DS's "ask question and get
immediate answer" culture. DS uses Slack channels to ask technical
questions, another for team learning, and other Slack channels for more
general questions or announcements. This approach basically cuts out the
need to know of whom questions should be asked. While I would argue that
a new hire orientation should involve a discussion about our
communication structure, to the credit of my DS colleagues, it is
rarely, if ever, the case that I do not get a response within minutes of
asking. Moreover, while it can feel silly to ask basic questions about
any given subject in this way, this method is effective.

However, when new hires are onboarded in the future will DS be confident
that we have captured key information in such a way that minimizes the
impact of one person leaving their role or moving on from the
organization? This is a question best left for another day.

Conclusion
----------

Our "orientation" relies heavily on our pair partners being able to
disseminate needed information as needed. The greatest benefit to this
approach is that new hires will get to interact with folks outside of
the particular teams to which they are assigned. For me, building a
sense of camaraderie with others through chatting in Slack has made my
experience uniquely more pleasant compared with my other work
experiences. The opportunity we have at DS is to mesh the best of
structured new hire orientation and pair-based onboarding. The
combination would address the two biggest challenges I faced.

The first hurdle to overcome was getting to know members of my
distributed and remote organization. The fact that I was forced to raise
my hand and ask for clarity on basic questions aided that effort. These
small interactions paved the way to feeling more comfortable asking more
in-depth questions whether in meetings or in chat. However, the second
was getting necessary information straight in my head so I could focus
on the larger challenges that my new role presented. Some things for me
would sink in better during a structured orientation. Arguably, each
approach has its benefits. On one hand if the pair partner is new, has a
knowledge gap, or simply forgets to mention something, it is possible
that basic information will not be trickled down. On the other hand,
structured meetings can be so long and dull that most of the information
that is relayed will be lost. Certainly, there is a balance that must be
reached.

Onboarding, being the act of integrating a new employee into an
organization, , can create an opportunity for improvement as well as
highlight other matters that may need consideration. While we can all
probably agree that the basics of new hire orientation should handle
where to find information about key topics, communicate how the
organization handles calendars, administrivia and benefits and make key
introductions, I would argue the most impactful integration occurs while
working day to day on the team. Aside from the details I mentioned
above, having a sense of belonging in an organization is very much
achieved by using the mob approach to onboarding a new hire. This has
profound benefits that are difficult to quantify\-- as well as the
previously mentioned risks. If I could have had a more robust new hire
experience as outlined and also maintain the relationships I have built
up with my colleagues through addressing these same subjects, that would
be a sure win. At the very least, these hypotheses may be worthy of
experimentation.
