---
title: "Why Mentorship Matters More Than You
  Think"
author: "Kourtney Reynolds"
date: 2020-04-06
---

Batman and Robin. Dr. Evil and Mini Me. Yoda and Luke Skywalker. What do
these characters have in common besides cool outfits? In a word:
Mentorship. Whether it's plotting to destroy the world or save it from
certain destruction, mentorship made all the difference in how these
character's fates played out. While I mention these characters in jest,
there is a valuable lesson to be learned from the authors who dreamt
them up. I mean, seriously, can you imagine Robin taking off and
fighting crime without Batman? Or how much more time it would have taken
for Luke Skywalker to use the "Force" without master Yoda. I think you
see where I am going with this. As much as I would love to delve into
the specifics of each duo, we will have to save that for another time!
Instead, this is meant to be a discussion of why baking mentorship into
an organization matters more than one might think. More specifically, we
are going to take a quick look at what it has meant to me being so early
in my career developing software. Let's start with some background.

Background
----------

The vast majority of my career has been spent creating, updating, and
analyzing spatial data. A typical day in my life as a geographic
information systems (GIS) analyst looked completely different than it
does today as a software developer. My interest in writing code was born
from days spent processing and manipulating data by hand only to learn
after the heavy lifting had been done that there was a way to script
away so many mundane tasks with a Python library. Fast forward through a
few twists, turns, and a developer boot camp, and I found myself living
a new found dream: delivering code-based business solutions as a
front-end GIS Developer.

During that two year transition from analyst to developer with my former
employer, I was lucky enough to have had a mentor that was my biggest
fan and cheerleader. However, we lacked the main ingredient for a
successful mentor/mentee relationship; time. I was not getting up to
speed as a developer as quickly as I or my supervisors would have liked.
Regardless of the lip service that our leadership team paid to
mentorship, I was never able to get the kind of mentoring that would
have truly helped me build the skills I needed for short term success,
let alone long term success. In that case the biggest barrier was that
each person on our team was so strictly and tightly coupled to billable
hours on various projects, there was little to no time alloted for
practical mentorship. Did my former employer offer training hours? Sure.
However, being allocated a small bucket of training hours was not nearly
as helpful without being able to identify "what" I should have been
doing with those hours to grow as a developer. Unfortunately, we were
not working closely enough together day to day for me to even observe
and glean from my mentors' years of experience.

I spent a little time identifying mentorship needs to meet my career
goals that are probably common to anyone new to writing software for
multiple projects and working on remote and distributed teams. The areas
I identified as needing help with were around getting my code reviewed
for logical mistakes; figuring out what I didn't know and should learn
next; how to balance priorities between projects; how to estimate how
long implementing a fix or new feature I have never done would take, and
most importantly; how to approach writing code that is testable in some
way; not buggy or error prone. Getting weary of not getting much needed
feedback early enough, I began to experience regret in my new role. In
hindsight, I did not realize I needed to ask for help, because I thought
my experience was "normal" and expected. After about eight wearying
months in my newly acquired role, I left that organization and decided
to join HI Digital Solutions.

The Unsung Praises of Strong Style Pair-Programming
---------------------------------------------------

#### Mentorship by Navigating

"Strong-style" pairing programming is simple and an extremely useful
mentorship tool. This programming approach consists of having one person
writing code (the driver) while the other person has the high-level
control over what code should be written. The key is that the person
with the ideas must communicate with the person with the keyboard in
such a way that the code must be written together. I have both been the
"driver" and the "navigator" in these scenarios. While I was very
nervous about navigating at first, my seniors showed confidence in my
ability to contribute by coaching me through it. In our version of
strong-style pair programming, I was the driver, one of my teammates
would act as my coach and the other wrote the code. This worked
perfectly, because it ensured that we as a team were able to move
forward together but also would minimize having too much awkward
silence, if I was having trouble seeing the next step. Whether they
recognize it or not, I do feel more confident in my ability to
communicate abstractly. Sometimes I am wrong in my approach and that is
equally worth discussing to learn where improvement is needed. However,
them giving me a chance instead of just rushing ahead while I just sat
back trying my best to keep up, helped me become a better communicator
while sharpening my abstract thinking skills.

#### Mentorship by Driving

Being early in a career, getting feedback about what is idiomatic, what
is stylistic and other best coding practices has revolutionized the way
I implement coding solutions.

For better or worse, at my previous employer, I would muddle through
coding tasks and usually get something working during working hours.
Arguably, something working is better than nothing. However, I was not
becoming better at getting to a good solution in the time allotted for
the task. Nor was I able to make a "value to effort" based argument
about what parts of my code could use rework.

Dissimilarly, I have learned more at DS in a matter of weeks than what I
had learned in months with my previous employer. It's crazy to me that I
can see improvement already just by the nature of the way we work in
pairs. A very simple example of this happened when I first joined the
project. Regularly, while "driving" during strong-style pairing, was
given stylistic as well as idiomatic pointers that I absorbed and
started implementing immediately. The point here is that by pair
programming, the corrections I have received have contributed in a
meaningful way when compared with writing code alone. By minimizing code
readability rework, our team's task cycle times are impacted by
substantial issues rather than trivial ones. This is just one example.
There are so many examples of how pair programming has made me a better
developer, I could probably write a book on just that topic. Let's leave
it there for now.

Feedback
--------

#### One-on-Ones

The best experience I have had at DS has been around the very early
one-on-one meeting interactions with the two members of my team. As
mentioned in my background story, the issue of knowing what I needed to
learn next was always in the forefront of my mind. I was very exhausted.
I was constantly trying to devise a strategy for how to get better
without really knowing if what I was learning was necessary or relevant.
The opposite of that, became true when I joined DS. Having the time set
aside in the first three weeks of being onboarded to look at my personal
development goals; to address how I viewed my contribution to the team;
and to have candid discussion about my performance and other team
dynamics, removed the mystery around whether or not I was on the right
path. Not only did the first one-on-one give me solid feedback on what I
was doing well but it also highlighted the areas that needed attention
in a constructive way. Having had the opportunity to be mentored daily,
made the feedback so easy to recieve.

Finally, the most impactful thing that my colleagues make is a point to
ask me for feedback as well. Not only is there room made for discussion
about concerns I have about the job, they constantly ask me for feedback
about how they can contribute to my growth. This itself has been a
lesson for me in that no matter how much experience you have, getting
feedback to determine if something is working will need to continue
throughout the life of my career. It takes courage to seek out areas
that need improvement. The mentorship I have received from my seniors
has been dolled out with humility and has given me a sense of how
important it is that we move forward as a team.

#### Consequences of being candid

Mentorship opens up the communication gateways for candidness that can
lead to needed changes quicker; to the benefit of all parties. For
example, during my second monthly one-on-one, I was told that I was not
meeting expectations around managing my calendar. Coming from an
organization that was pretty lax about scheduling, let alone keeping a
calendar up-to-date, my schedule was quite sporadically kept when I
first joined DS. Naively, I had not noticed that my lack of consistency
was having a negative effect on my teammates' work schedules.
Coincidentally, both of my team members brought it up to me, separately,
within days of each other.

First of all, not being "chewed out" in front of my other teammate
established a sense of goodwill and respect that removed any feeling of
embarrassment that I probably would have had otherwise. By the time this
feedback was shared with me, I had an excellent rapport with them both
so I appreciated the directness in addressing the issue. Glad that I had
been made aware, I was able to immediately right the ship. Adding my
daily schedule to my work calendar, making it a priority to double check
that my vacation time, and double checking is logged properly in our
team calendar, is just a few examples of positive change. The
consequence of being straight forward about how my time management
behavior was causing confusion on the team led to me being able to
recognize the issue. After putting a few basic practices in place,
making a point to stick to them, and asking for feedback from my team,
the opportunity for improvement has been acknowledged and the issue
solved.

#### Building skill incrementally

Similar to constructive criticism, getting positive feedback early on
has been very advantageous. I have observed that my own estimates,
especially for practice projects, are wildly more optimistic than what,
actually, happens in real life. Facing this frustration head on has been
eye opening and my team has been there to remind me that getting up to a
higher level of skill takes time. They offer encouragement that
highlight the progress that they have seen during my time with DS. Also,
because there are no top-down artificial time constraints placed on my
practice projects, it gives me room to actually learn and not just learn
how to find someone else's answer on Google.

My colleagues at DS are constantly showing me that while conceptually
solving problems programmatically can be fairly straight forward, doing
it well is very much a skill. And skills building will very much take
time. With respect to internalizing the warnings of those wiser than me
about avoiding working to a point of burnout, I have been able to take
daily practice time very seriously and making incremental progress by
allowing myself to stop working when the work day ends. With a great
deal of consistency, my teammates communicate that the most important
thing about improving is the journey and not the perceived "end" goal.
The nature of our work involves learning everyday, so I will never be
"done" or reach the "end" so long as writing software is my career path.

Focus the firehose with short-term goals
----------------------------------------

#### Mentorship can fast track meaningful contribution

When I first started at DS, each day in my new role there was a new
shiny tool I was seeing for the first time. I also had zero experience
with test driven development, so adjusting to writing code starting with
a test was, predictably, a struggle. Not to mention stubbing servers for
testing, understanding CI/CD, using serverless infrastructure,
conceptualizing containerization or simply writing code without aid from
the debugger. Although I had some exposure to .NET development in my
previous position, I was not comfortable with writing C\# solo. In
short, I was having a hard time finding my footing when it came to
contributing.

By the team prioritizing early contribution, I was afforded an
opportunity to truly *own* the problem for which our team was creating a
solution. Our project was well underway when I joined, and at a high
level I understood the automation solution being delivered. However, I
had trouble reasoning about some of the broader architecture around our
solution. In order to deepen my understanding, my colleagues "turned me
loose" on tasks including writing small code slices, refactoring out
functions, figuring out next steps and leaving a message in our team
chat or updating documentation.They made room for growth by allowing me
to try implementing something on my own. If I was successful at the
task, great! However, if I had difficulty with something, it created an
opportunity to pinpoint knowledge gaps the following morning. This
mentorship technique helped when understanding our architecture more
broadly because I was not getting distracted by misunderstanding smaller
implementation details.

#### Identifying unknowing self-sabotage

One of the biggest reasons for joining DS was that the organization
takes a sincere interest in self-learning and skills sharpening outside
of project work. For the first few weeks at DS, I struggled to get
traction in any one area. After a few conversations with my teammates,
it became very clear that I needed to apply our "focus on one thing at a
time" rule to my learning plan. Coming from a company that placed value
on juggling multiple things at one time, it took a while for this
concept to trickle down into my own personal development strategy. Why
do I care so much about focusing on one thing at a time? Let's take a
brief context detour.

Before joining DS, I had no idea of the numerous tools that could make
development easier. I had grown accustomed to a sink-or-swim-alone kind
of model. At my previous employer, every person on our team had almost
all their time allocated to a certain number of tasks for each sprint
cycle. While maximized billing was great for our organization's bottom
line, it made getting and giving help almost impossible.\
Furthermore, the result of having multiple projects going at the same
time, made it necessary to find a way to multi-focus, accordingly.

Aside from lack of time to build skills incrementally, there were many
days that were overflowing with meetings so much so that I found it
difficult to keep the various meetings' content straight. We probably
can agree that writing code takes a high degree of concentration. Ergo,
the cognitive load of switching between meetings and coding made it
difficult to recall where I left off in my task. Many days, I burned
time just trying to figure out how to get back into the groove of coding
for a particular task. Consequently, I had formed a poor habit of
"rushing around" the code and documentation trying to hurry up and jump
back in to move my project forward. I was not using tests to guide the
code updates and little time was spent thinking about how to best
implement a programmatic solution.

#### Teaching how to self correct

Fortunately, I am thrilled to be working with a company that values
working together to solve problems; coming up with a game plan to narrow
my focus was no exception. The real difference maker has been the
attitude of the team day to day helping me establish productive habits
by keeping me accountable to focus my time and effort. First, before my
teammates ended their day they made sure that I had what I needed to
keep moving forward. Second, we would agree on the slice of work or the
next learning task I was targeting for completion. Finally, the
following morning, space has been created for me to report about the
previous day's progress. Daily, ample time is given for me to bring
higher level questions as well. Oftentimes, article or book
recommendations have arisen from those talks.

As a result of the daily talks about progress, I have been forced to
practice intentional focus because I know the next day I am going to
have to give a progress report. By virtue of this process I am learning
to self correct out of old habits. However, there are still times when I
am thrown off course. For example, while working on a project whose
primary focus is specifically acceptance testing, I experienced a high
level of frustration with getting the project up and running.
Predictably, my team identified, during a morning check-in, my focus was
being pulled in at least two, if not more, other directions:
infrastructure and containerization. Unwittingly, as I was using our
project work as an example, I failed to stay focused on the subject of
interest. The same day, I started over with the most basic project setup
and only added what was absolutely necessary for the given scenario.
That is the most recent account but it probably won't be the last.
However, the difference is that this issue is coming up less frequently
because I am more able to recognize when my focus is skewed. Ultimately,
mentorship has taught and continues to teach me how to self correct out
of this habit.

Conclusion
----------

As an early career engineer, I have enjoyed several benefits of
intentional mentorship from my team. Whether it be idiomatic
corrections, growing abstract thinking skills, or helping me focus on
one thing at a time, they have set me on a path of long term career
success. Certainly, the thoughtful approach that my colleagues have
taken in guiding my growth have yielded far superior results in a
shorter amount of time than if I would have been left to learn the same
lessons on my own. Having candid conversations about expectations and
areas pointed out where they see growth happening has given me a
tremendous amount of hope for reaching my career goals within the
organization and beyond. The optimism they have shown has inspired a
desire in me to do the same for someone else. If there was ever a lesson
to learn about how to build healthy thriving teams, mentorship is the
"pay-it-forward" investment every organization should consider targeting
for rework.
